---
title: "THE UNITED FRUIT COMPANY"
categories:
  - Blog
  - History
tags:
  - history
--- 

### Edward L. Bernays

## Biography of an Idea: The Founding Principles of Public Relations

### chapter66
 
THE UNITED FRUIT COMPANY
 
Communist penetration, Mayan excavations, world-wide revolutionary movements, celiac disease and bananas engaged my interest for almost twenty years, beginning in the early 1940s, when I first became counsel on public relations to the United Fruit Company, working closely with its president, Samuel Zemurray, who later became chairman of the board. Zemurray headed an industrial empire. The United Fruit Company, the world's largest grower and distributor of bananas, headquartered in Boston, carried on diversified operations in great land areas in Central and South America and the West Indies. The company imported between 55 and 60 per cent of the bananas brought to this country-some sixty million stems.
 
Honduras produced 25 per cent of its bananas, Costa Rica a slightly smaller percentage, and Panama, Colombia, Ecuador, the Dominican Republic and Jamaica the rest. The company owned and operated 1,500 miles of railroad to carry its products to market; it owned the Tropical Radio Telegraph Company and a Great White Fleet of 52 ships, which it operated.
 
Eighty-five per cent of the United Fruit bananas were consigned to the United States and Canada; Great Britain and Europe got the other 15 per cent through a subsidiary, Elder and Fyffe. The company produced sugar in Cuba and refined it near Boston; it grew cocoa-oil palm and hardwoods, and had a contract with the 
U.S. to grow abaca, a Manila hemp used for cordage.
 
The company had its own agricultural research department, which investigated insecticides and fungicides to insure the continuity of its banana plantations. A home-economics department carried on research on how best to use bananas in the home. The company owned and published a newspaper in Honduras. Eighty-two thousand employees worked for it in the American tropics. It operated fifteen hospitals and 237 schools and supplied subsistence plots, housing accommodations, clubhouses and theaters. Through company commissaries it sold practically everything its employees needed, at a mark-up that was just enough to cover operating expenses. At the time the company earned some 50 million dollars net profit.
 
Zemurray's New York headquarters were located-quite properly, I thought-on Pier 3, a rambling, ramshackle structure over the Hudson River. I felt as if I were on the first lap of a ship's voyage to the American tropics as I stepped out of the taxi and wound my way between new auto trucks parked at the pier's entrance, destined for shipment to Guatemala. The same ship would return to the U.S. with its load of bananas.
 
A steward ushered me into the slow-moving elevator. I felt I was on shipboard as I was lifted to the top deck of the pier. As I stepped into the hall, I noticed a ship's chronometer hung on the wall.
 
Mr. Zemurray sat at a flat-top desk in a large room overlooking the Hudson River. A tall, well-built man, six feet two or three, he towered over me as he stood to greet me. His accent was slightly guttural, a hangover from immigrant days, I learned later. He had great surety about himself, and after a few minutes of conversation I recognized I was in the presence of a wise, strong, mature man.
 
As Mr. Zemurray discussed company public relations with me a clerk entered the office three times, each time handing Zemurray a telegram. Zemurray glanced at each without interrupting his conversation, crumpled it and dropped it into the wastebasket. Later he said to me, "Every telegram brought news of the sinking of a United Fruit ship by German submarines in the Gulf of Mexico-three in a row."
 
A man who could concentrate on his conversation while reports were brought to him of three disasters at sea involving loss of lives, cargoes and money, was fitted by temperament to direct an American industrial and agricultural complex in the Middle American jungles. A man needed iron nerves and a powerful personality to deal with such affairs. Zemurray was an extraordinary man, experienced in the rough-and-tumble action of the banana business, and with a broad liberal, philosophic bent. In years of meeting tycoons, I had met few who combined as he did the ability to think abstractly and to translate ideas into actions. He was an industrial statesman and he had better have been one, for the growing and selling of bananas, at which he had gained his experience, turned out to be only a minor part of his business.
 
A. A. Pollan sat in the room with us, listening quietly while we talked. He was the hard-bitten executive vice-president of the United Fruit Company. Like most of the company's executives, he had spent his business life with the company. A company man usually started as a timekeeper in the tropics. The company offered expanding opportunities, and a career man eventually became a division head. Sometimes a man returned to the home office in Boston as a vice-president or an officer at headquarters in charge of some tropical activities of the company. The company used up a man's whole business life and then gave him a retirement pension. Marriages of sons and daughters of Fruiters sometimes took place in the company's plantation towns in Guatemala, Honduras, Panama and other countries. These couples knew their future was assured with the company, for United Fruit was a way oflife; the company was conducted like a private government. It had its own behavior patterns and loyalties. Individual lives were merged with the company's life, for the company decided who was to live where, and how long. United Fruit employees in the tropics were thrown among other members of the company in all their activities. The company plantation in the jungle town was a settlement of American people, houses and folkways.
 
Later I was to meet the third member of the United Fruit group which came to New York weekly from Boston-Frank Hatch. I never knew exactly what Hatch did. He seemed an alter ego to A. A. Pollan, an understudy who finished what Pollan started. Hatch, the only college graduate of the three, was proud of his days at Dartmouth.
 
Zemurray conducted our discussion as if we were sitting together leisurely in the smoking room of an ocean liner. No protocol, pressure or time sense that usually characterize a formal conference marred the friendly get-together. I think that seventy years of company background had helped produce this kind of fraternization, which was more like the feeling in an officer's mess than in an office. No one asked direct questions that demanded immediate direct answers. The conversation drifted casually. I might say, "Well, shall we go ahead with that?" Someone else would remark, ''What do you think?" Somebody else, "Why not go ahead?" That was it. Actions involving thousands of people and an expenditure of thousands of dollars might hinge on the interpretation of a sentence. But in two decades no one misunderstood.
 
After the first meeting, when Zemurray wanted to see me and his New York secretary called to make the engagement with me, it was not for a specific time but rather for sometime in the afternoon. Our talks usually lasted until it was time for Zemurray to leave Pier 3 to catch the Merchants Limited at s P.M. for Boston.
 
Zemurray talked to me often of the company's present and future, but never of the past. His attitude toward the future was exemplified by his answer to my question about the crop diversification that was the company's policy. He said he was planting mahogany trees. "How long will it take for them to mature?" I asked. His answer: "Sixty years."
 
Samuel Zemurray was forward-looking, and I felt that his first years in this country had made him progressive in thought and action. He practiced his philosophy in socially advanced policies in the tropics. He paid higher than prevailing wages to tropical workers and improved working conditions. He gave Tulane University one million dollars for a Middle American Institute, and endowed a $250,000 chair at Harvard for a woman professor. He was adviser to Henry Wallace on the Board of Economic Welfare, helped with the AAA project and was a member of the Fair Employment Practice Commission; during the war he helped bring Bahama agricultural workers to the U.S. to relieve the labor shortage here.
 
Fortune had published a lurid story about him some years before, depicting him as a young free-wheeler. He had come to the United States from Bessarabia in 1892, his name anglicized from Zmuri. Called Sam the Banana Man, he bought bananas from nonrefrigerated ships at Mobile, Alabama, that were too ripe for distant sales, then telegraphed ahead to railroad stations out of Mobile and arranged for the sale of his bananas at train stops.
 
He started his tropical banana business in Honduras, where he struck a bargain with President Davila to bring in equipment duty free. The Morgan banking house was negotiating a loan with Davila at the time, with a proviso that Morgan agents watch over Honduras customhouses and that no other business deals be made by Honduras without their consent. That was the pattern in the Caribbean then. Zemurray, blocked by the Morgan move, plotted with an ex-president of Honduras, Manuel Bonilla, in the United States to overthrow the Honduran government. Bonilla slipped from the United States to Honduras and six hundred of his men took the capital, Tegucigalpa, without incident. In the next Honduras election the Morgan proposal was repudiated. Bonilla was voted in as President. At that time, United Fruit was Zemurray's competitor in Honduras. In the 1920s, Zemurray instituted irrigation in Honduras. As a result, he produced more and better bananas, and his company became the number one U. S. banana company.
 
In 1930, Zemurray sold his Cuyamel Company to the United Fruit Company and received 300,000 of their shares, worth about $31.5 million. In the Depression years, as American purchasing power evaporated and Mexico dumped 14,500,000 banana stems a year on the American market, United Fruit stock went down and sold at 10-1/4

In 1933 Zemurray appeared at a United Fruit board meeting and announced, "You people have been botching up this business long enough." He became managing director in charge of operations and then president. Two weeks after his appointment, United Fruit stock rose to 26.
 
Before Zemurray's association with the United Fruit Company, the company had had a spectacular history. Lorenzo Dow Baker, skipper of the Boston schooner Telegraph, in 1870 bought 160 bunches of bananas at a shilling a bunch in Jamaica. He sold them at $2 to $3.25 a bunch in New York. The next summer Baker made two trips to Jamaica for bananas, selling them through a Boston commission house. In the 1870s bananas were imported to the U. S. by the thousands, and by 1885 imports had increased to 10,000,000 bunches annually. That year Baker and his associates founded the Boston Fruit Company, capitalized at $15,000. In five years, Boston Fruit capital increased to $531,000 and it had bought control of three rival companies.
 
By 1898 Boston Fruit had acquired 40,000 acres of banana land in the Dominican Republic. The next year Boston Fruit, in need of additional land in Central America, merged with the properties of an American empire builder, Minor Cooper Keith, who owned nearly 250,000 acres of banana land in Costa Rica and needed money badly. The United Fruit Company resulted. It was difficult to finance its original capitalization of $20,000,000; the public subscribed to only 16,000 shares when stock was first offered. But within twenty years its stock sold at 205 and paid out a 100 per cent dividend. In 1926 the stock split 2. for each $100 certificate. The new shares earned $7.80 each and moved to well over 100. Between 1942 and 1952 United Fruit boosted its assets 133.8 per cent and paid out 61.7 per cent to stockholders. It was a highly profitable venture.
 
I came away from my first conversation with Zemurray with admiration for the man, and throughout our relationship of two decades this remained my feeling. At our first meeting he had told me about the problems the company was facing. And it had suffered, I told him, because the company had not told the public about itself, because it believed in the privacy of a privately owned business. The public thought of the company in its old role of colonial exploiter, and those days were over in the early Forties. The good-neighbor policy then dominated our relations with Latin America. Self-determination and nationalism were in the atmosphere. Zemurray had said to me in our first talk, referring to the people of the Middle American countries, "We can't get them to love us. Maybe they will learn to tolerate us." I said the people of the United States knew these Caribbean countries as banana republics, components of revolutions, dictatorships and marines, and not much else.
 
I told Zemurray the U. S. should learn more about the countries in which the company functioned and what social, economic, or other purposes it fulfilled. As a first step I organized the "Middle America Information Bureau, conducted by the United Fruit Company," set up in our office. We corresponded actively with 25,000 Americans-group leaders and opinion molders. We tried to interest them in Middle America; we supplied them with facts and point of view. The name "Middle America" was used by the institute Zemurray had endowed at Tulane. The Bureau caught on, with its correspondents and with the public. Within a year authoritative atlases used the name Middle America to describe the territory in which the company was active. We were succeeding in equating the company with the area in which it functioned; they became interchangeable concepts. This gave the public a better understanding of the company and its problems and of any political or other newsworthy events in Middle America.
 
I enjoyed carrying on the work of the Middle America Information Bureau. The project mushroomed so fast that I suggested that the company let a free-lance journalist, Charles Morrow Wilson, then doing some writing for the company, became nominal director of the Middle America Information Bureau.
 
The Middle America Information Bureau continued its work for a number of years and successfully filled its mission. Zemurray stepped up as chairman of the Board, and Thomas D. Cabot, a member of the Board, was installed as president, but he kept the office only a short while. I had known this type of man, narrow in outlook and secure in his feelings of correctitude.
 
Before he had had a chance to discuss the Bureau or its functions, he ordered the work discontinued immediately; he could see no relationship between the United Fruit Company and a four-eyed fish, a rare species found in a Colombian lake. We had used the strange fish in our story because those four eyes would lead the reader into a description of how citizen farmers of Colombia cultivated bananas. This fish ended a painstakingly developed and effective program. But fortunately for the company, the Bureau's work had made a deep impression on the country.
 
Many business decisions are snap judgments. In government, publicity often helps insure sound decisions or correction of poor ones. The notion that business decisions are the result of more and better deliberations than those in government has no basis in fact.
 
In these war years other activities engaged our time. United Fruit's ships, operated by company personnel, had been taken over by the U.S. Navy to carry war material and other cargo needed for our defenses in the Panama Canal Zone. We were able to emphasize to the public the wartime importance of the banana trade. At the same time the ships picked up banana cargoes on their way back to this country and thus aided the economy of Central American countries. The political stability of these countries was also aided, a factor that was important to the United States at war.
 
The company agreed to grow Manila hemp for our government in the American tropics, since the Philippines, under Japanese domination, no longer provided for our needs. Manila hemp was used in rope, necessary for shipping, agriculture and other vital activities, and the publicizing of this wartime activity promoted good will for the company. There was much publicizing, too, of such diversified tropical crops as lemons and palm oil, which the company was trying out in the American tropics.
 
I felt Middle America was so important to the country, and the country so ignorant of it due to lack of communications between us, that I suggested a One.Day Institute at the Waldorf-Astoria to dramatize the close relationship that actually existed. I think Zemurray was skeptical about my accomplishing much through such an effort, but he let me go ahead. At morning, lunch and afternoon sessions, outstanding Latin American and United States experts presented different aspects of this interrelationship: agriculture, credit, strategic materials, air transport and so on. The event was heavily attended by VIPs. We accomplished our objective in stimulating interest and publicity. Zemurray, baffled, called me in and asked me to explain the success of the conference. I told him that most of the speakers had some idea of what they wanted to promote, something they wanted acceptance and publicity for. He looked at me quizzically, but a truth dawned on him. Now he understood, and he said, "I know, I know-they take in each other's washing."
 
I thought the company would accept my suggestion that it celebrate its Diamond Jubilee in July 1946, the 75th anniversary of Lorenzo Baker's shipment of bananas from Jamaica on his boat, the Telegraph. But Boston had not yet been sufficiently indoctrinated to accept my recommendation and vetoed the idea.
 
The next year I did get an opportunity to try my approaches by promoting an archaeological monument of the ancient Mayans in Guatemala-a restoration of ball courts. Zemurray had the sound idea that belief of a people in their past would give them a better morale today. He restored Mayan ruins and presented them to the state. I worked out a program of publicity, even suggesting a Guatemalan postage stamp depicting the Mayan playing court, to commemorate the event. The stamp was duly issued and the ruins were brought to the attention of the people of Guatemala. Any people who could look back to the grandeur represented by the huge stone amphitheater must have had a feeling of satisfaction that their ancestors had such a great and thriving civilization, and the feeling that some of this greatness survived in them. But other influences were also making their impact on the Guatemalans.
 
In these first years with the company, I worked with Zemurray, Pollan and Hatch. Then I was introduced to Edmund S. Whitman, director of United Fruit's advertising and publicity department, and to Russell G. Partridge, advertising manager of the Fruit Dispatch Company, the distribution subsidiary of the company. The high command had had me function without contact with these departments for years-why, I never learned. I now worked with Partridge and Whitman and also continued with the top echelon. As I look back, I wonder why I wasn't more inquisitive about it. Maybe a framed picture that hung in the offices of some executives of the company had affected me. It showed a businessman at a desk, pounding the table. Opposite him sat another man, quivering. The caption read, "Damn it, there's no reason for it. It's our policy."
 
Partridge and Whitman had been with the United Fruit Company their entire working lives. Partridge, who came from a Boston suburb, had joined the company law department after his graduation from Harvard Law School in 1908. Although he had had no advertising experience, he was appointed advertising and promotion manager of Fruit Dispatch. A tall and vigorous man, sixty, always spirited, it was difficult to believe he suffered constantly from a back pain. He headed a tiny empire of a few people and brooked no interference from anybody. Nobody knew or cared much about advertising or promotion at Fruit Dispatch. He devoted his waking hours to thinking of ways to sell more bananas. He studied the banana's promotional problems from many angles, such as bananas' significance as a dessert, their place in the diet, their therapeutic effect. To his visitors he presented Chiquita Banana neckties. His personal Christmas cards were decorated with bananas. To him Chiquita, the Spanish dancing-girl symbol of the banana, was like a close relative, "a priceless asset, our golden bonanza girl," and he felt she belonged in the advertising hall of fame.
 
Edmund S. Whitman was also a New Englander, the son of an Army officer, educated at schools at numerous Army posts. He too had spent his working life with the company, starting as a timekeeper on a banana plantation. Now located at New York headquarters, he headed advertising and publicity. The job had not been a heavy duty for him until I became associated with the company; then he was activated by a new public relations awareness. At the age of fifty, his life suddenly grew hectic and his activities broadened.
 
Zemurray must have felt I was learning the ropes for he suggested that Doris and I take a trip to Honduras and Guatemala to see for ourselves how things operated in the tropics. In 1947 we set out with our daughter Doris, aged eighteen, and with Ed Whitman and his wife, Ann, who later became President Eisenhower's secretary. We spent a memorable month in the tropics as company guests. I learned at first hand what I had only known about by word of mouth, book or pictures. We went by boat to Tela, the U.F.C. port in Honduras, then by air to Tegucigalpa, the capital city of Honduras, and Guatemala City, capital of Guatemala. The trip was a series of astonishments and surprises at the contrasts in civilization between the United States and Middle America, and great admiration for the accomplishment of an American company in a wilderness.
 
And it was a wilderness. Within stone's throw of the modern little town of Tela was a primitive settlement of descendants of Carib Negroes on the seacoast, who had escaped when they were first brought to this country centuries ago as slaves and had continued to live as they had in the African jungle. The children were naked. Thatched huts made up the village. In front of each a woman was using a sewing machine. Hand-carved fishing canoes were used to provide their main source of sustenance. Some Caribs worked for the Fruit Company loading heavy banana bunches onto conveyors to the ship's hold. They tramped from the freight cars that had brought the bananas to the pier.
 
I came back greatly impressed both by the efficiencies and inefficiencies of the company. I was amazed at the company's accomplishment in transplanting men and materials to a jungle area, and at how effectively it used them in its yellow-gold plantations.
 
Varied activities, on a huge scale, were so synchronized that bananas picked on an inland plantation were loaded onto a ship at the right moment for refrigeration; research on fungicides and pesticides had received painstaking attention; but human and social problems had not been given comparable study.
 
One glaring omission was the lack of attention given by the company to passing on its know-how to its employees on shipboard, and in Honduras and Guatemala. The only memory the company had was the collective memory of individuals. The fifty years' experience in growing bananas was learned by trial and error by every new employee. There were no manuals to speed the learning process and transmit knowledge and experience. Often this kind of unmethod is dictated by an executive who has learned his skills and know-how the hard way and makes the young man learn them the same way.
 
Ship captains and officers, splendid seamen, knew little about the company, its history, policies or its economic status, or, for that matter, the countries the ships touched at. When they discussed matters of company interest with passengers, they did so as wise or ignorant individuals, as it happened, instead of as representatives of the corporation. Pursers were given their own discretion. In the jungle company towns we found executives' electric refrigerators laden with Black Label Scotch and Coca-Cola, but the bookshelves were empty. These executives were unaware of the new literature available in their particular field of interest-agriculture, industrial relations, or tropical agriculture. As for promising young employees, they were given no clear-cut information about the company, its operations or their future chances of growth.
 
Rumors based on distortion or ignorance were often prevalent. Morale was acquired individually if at all, rather than as the result of conscious planning of the company, consistent with sound practices.
 
The native agricultural workers were treated as human machines rather than as human beings and without regard to their folkways or culture patterns. Anthropologists and sociologists were making studies of behavior of people in Middle America, but, for the company, social sciences might as well have not existed.
 
My memorandum suggested methods for transmitting and raising morale and understanding among employees, such as supplying orientation handbooks and manuals to overseers, clerical workers, housekeepers and other employees. I urged a new personnel recruitment policy to replace the haphazard practice that prevailed. The company had brought in many Southerners because of the similarity of their home climate to the tropics. They were prejudiced against colored people and brought unhealthy attitudes to the company towns.
 
I urged that a library be set up to insure a flow of bibliographical material on tropical agriculture, engineering and other pertinent topics to inform executives of advances in their own fields. Continuing communication between company and employees was lacking. I urged bulletin boards, on-the-job booklets, letters and memoranda, meetings and conferences. I suggested that pictures of the company offices and of the Mayan ruins be hung in United Fruit establishments in the tropics. I urged talks by company executives to employees to identity them with company policy, company town news bulletins to build morale among employees in the jungle towns, and awards for merit.
 
One man who had worked with the company for twenty-five years told me he received a gift of fifty silver dollars from his office colleagues. He was so touched he didn't know whether to spend them or keep them as a souvenir. The company, on the other hand, had shown no sign of recognizing his quarter-century service. Another executive, celebrating his twenty-fifth anniversary with the company alone, told me of it with wistful sadness and wondered if anybody but himself knew he had been around that long.
 
Assembly quarters in company towns were unattractive and showed little individuality or relationship to the United Fruit Company. Paintings or photo montages, books and current magazines could have improved their drawing powers. Americans far from home needed to have their spirits bucked up. Wives were criticizing the commissary not for what it carried but for what it did not. A simple consumer survey once a year, asking customers for preferences as to products and brands, might have corrected an ever-present gripe.
 
But a company does not break with tradition easily. The people in the tropics were remote from Boston; they produced their banana quotas, and that was what counted. Fruit Company executives in the tropics were tough characters who had come up through the ranks; they were action-related men. What I proposed must have seemed like mollycoddling.
 
I got no reaction to my voluminous report. I was not surprised; it had happened before. Clients often adopted my recommendations without telling me they had. To have told me might be a reflection on their past accomplishments. Not to tell me was not acknowledging their past inadequacies.
 
I had learned much about the tropics, and the reading I did before we went down gave me additional insights that helped me immeasurably. I was to have much opportunity in the next decade to act on what I had seen and heard there.
 
In 1949, Partridge and I began work together on what we called the "celiac project." Celiac disease is a debilitating digestive disease of children. Dr. Sydney Haas, a respected New York pediatrician, had reported some years before that a banana diet cured children with celiac disease, and a medical magazine had reported his clinical findings. In my childhood my mother thought bananas too indigestible for children; we were forbidden to eat them. But our children received them as almost their first solid food. After Dr. Haas's fortuitous discovery, bananas became a must in the diet of infants, and baby-food manufacturers began to market mashed bananas in jars.
 
Eleanor Sanger, a friend who was the program director of the New York Times station, WQXR, told me she and some friends wanted to honor Dr. Sydney Haas for his fifty years as a physician, for his contribution in discovering the use of bananas for celiac disease and for his treatment of the hypertonic infant. She knew we were working with United Fruit; would I help her? We commemorated Dr. Haas's seventy-ninth birthday with a Golden Jubilee Tribute at a lunch at the New York Academy of Medicine. Robert Moses and Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Hays Sulzberger served on the sponsoring committee. Dr. Evan Evans, the distinguished diagnostician, headed the physicians' group. We saw to it that Haas's paper "The Value of the Banana in the Treatment of Celiac Disease" published two decades before, received national recognition. Haas himself became the beneficiary of a flood of publicity in newspapers and magazines.
 
One hundred thousand copies of a small hard-cover book, which we edited describing the Haas luncheon, went to editors, publishers, librarians, dieticians, home economists, pediatricians and physicians specializing in digestive disorders. Haas loved the fuss made over him. After a life of comparative anonymity he became famous, with the beneficent relationship between bananas and celiac disease and his part in it emphasized to public and profession alike.
 
Our explorations into celiac disease took us to other medical areas. A medical researcher, Dr. Dorothy Anderson, independently of Dr. Haas, was investigating celiac disease at the Children's Hospital of the Presbyterian Medical Center, working with Dr. Paul di St. Agnese, a brilliant medical researcher from Rome. They had completed a study of celiac and sprue, a related disease, and they confirmed the value of bananas in its treatment, although the explanations for their digestibility differed from those of Dr. Haas. The United Fruit Company, at my suggestion, gave research funds, with no strings attached, to the Presbyterian Hospital and Dr. di St. Agnese for further study. In 1953, additional grants were made to Drs. Haas, Anderson and di St. Agnese to help them try to find out what was in bananas that made them so digestible. From this research came a scientific serendipity finding, for Dr. di St. Agnese discovered a now recognized diagnosis for cystic fibrosis, by measuring the salt content of sweat.
 
Physicians are a captive audience in this country. Their names are readily available. Because they receive so much mail, I felt that additional steps were still necessary to make them realize the values of the banana diet for celiac disease. We recommended that Dr. Haas, with Milton Zisowitz, write a carefully prepared and documented medical book on the disease. Lippincott published it, and a card from a committee of Haas sponsors went with the copy to all American M.D.'s. Favorable reviews appeared in the medical press, which further accelerated support for the banana diet.
 
Other banana problems led us further into the medical field. In the polio epidemic of 1949 damaging rumors circulated that bananas had caused the outbreak of the disease. Naturally, the company wanted to deny the untrue rumor immediately. I said no one would believe a direct refutation by the company. Basil O'Connor of the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, and Dr. Van Riper, its medical director, willingly co-operated with us to kill the rumor.
 
Newspaper advertisements were placed in cities where the story was alive. This recommendation blanketed the rumor "Keep food clean. Scientific investigation shows that meat, fruit, vegetables and other foods do not cause paralysis. Food should be kept covered and free from flies." The advertisement stated that funds had been provided by friends of the National Foundation as a contribution to the educational activities of that organization. The friends were the Fruit Company.
 
The rumor was traced to a research project at Yale in which a chimpanzee that ate bananas happened to become infected with the polio virus. 

The Foundation wrote explanatory letters to doctors in areas where the rumor was prevalent, and it died.
 
In 1950 I became involved for a decade in the political and social upheavals that to this day plague the Caribbean. It is difficult to know-and even the experts disagree-whether these trends and events were directed by Russian Communists or whether they took advantage and accelerated what would have taken place anyway. I thought then such events were Communist-furthered, but whether or not they were, they had a deep, upsetting effect and posed a threat.
 
In my talks with Zemurray, after Doris and I visited the tropics, I often pointed out the great gulf I had observed there between the rich and the poor. There was no middle class and little or no sense of social responsibility among the rich. I felt keenly that this disparity must be a source of serious dissatisfaction to those who lived in such disheartening misery and poverty. The United Fruit Company, to be sure, paid higher wages to its workers than prevailing wages in the area, but living standards were generally very low.
 
I kept insisting to Zemurray that revolutionary movements would spread in Middle America, as they had in other parts of the world. Despite his wisdom and mature judgment, Zemurray kept pooh-poohing this warning. The Indians, he said, were too ignorant; they had no channels of communication, no press or radio, which drew dissidents together in other parts of the world. How could ideas of Communism be spread from one person to another-and ignorant persons at that.without primary channels of communication? Zemurray's analysis was logically correct, but it did not apply. I once talked to Lombardo Toledano, the left-wing Mexican labor leader, who told me that on one of his trips to Peru hundreds of Indians had walked miles to meet him, although no mechanical means of communication had carried news of his arrival to them. The post-World War II period brought with it revolutionary ferment in Asia and Africa. And ideas of revolution were bound to spread to the Southern Hemisphere, flashed by means of the grapevine to the most illiterate Indians.
 
In my talks with Zemurray I had said that if the people of the United States and our government understood the dangers of political and social instability in Latin America, they might take steps to improve the situation. This is what the Alliance for Progress is now attempting to do. But Zemurray disbelieved that any eventuality of this kind might arise, despite the company's knowledge that Communists had established the first national labor organization in Guatemala in 1945 and that in September 1947 Guatemala's first Communist Party had been established secretly. It had political and labor leaders, representing themselves as non-Communists. In 1947, 1948 and 1949, propaganda agencies affiliated with international Communist movements had established a youth organization, a national peace committee, and a front of American and Spanish Democratic exiles in Guatemala.
 
In 1949-50 Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Hays Sulzberger of the Times went to Guatemala on a visit to their good friend Ambassador Richard Patterson. While they were there, the Communists staged an anti-American demonstration, which induced Mr. Sulzberger to investigate the situation thoroughly.
 
In January, 1950, the New York Herald Tribune sent Fitzhugh Turner to the tropics to write a series of articles about conditions. He raised doubts about what might happen to foreign companies doing business in Guatemala, where the United Fruit Company cultivated thousands of acres of bananas.
 
Turner found that Communist sympathizers, with the acquiescence of President Arevolo, held important press, radio and government posts and that other Communists had power in political parties and labor unions, from which groups Arevolo drew his strength. Guatemala had some links to the Soviet Union, but Turner said Guatemalan leftism was not Russian but Latin, that Marxist ideology and Communist propaganda were mixed up with antigringoism, local nationalism and personal politicking, traditional in the Latin world.
 
Arevolo carried on anti-American propaganda against the three big companies in Guatemala. Defense Minister Jacobo Arbenz told an American, ''You people are doing things for your workers that we won't be able to do for fifty years. That's why I hate you." Turner wrote, "Guatemala harbors one of the two principal bases of the Caribbean Legion, an organization with military designs against neighboring governments. The Legion plots rebellion within the country under attack and moves in with the outbreak of revolt, distributing arms and leading rebels against the government. The Legion, according to the OAS, does much to keep the Caribbean in a state of uproar."
 
Turner pointed out that for years Guatemala had been under the strict dictatorship of a ruthless leader, Jorge Ibico. Juan Jose Arevolo, a schoolteacher, returned from years of exile in Argentina and liberated the people, and the pendulum of ideology naturally had swung in the other direction.
 
At about this time New York Times reporter Will Lissner was sent down, as he told me recently, with instructions, "to go anywhere and do anything I thought necessary to get an accurate estimate of the situation."
 
On March 18, 1950, The Nation carried an article along the lines of the Herald Tribune. At a conference with Zemurray, Montgomery (a director of the company from New Orleans), and Whitman, I proposed sending the Nation article to 100,000 liberals. I believed the Caribbean ferment was bound to become increasingly important. Liberals must play a decisive role. Zemurray agreed.
 
That summer little change occurred in Guatemala. In the fall I said we could increase visibility by gradualism-by placing an article in one magazine and letting other publications pick it up. This slow method would eventually bring general recognition of what was happening. Or we could try to get simultaneous exposure in a number of media and count on public opinion in this country to express itself.
 
I favored the quick method. If we waited for the interminable time it would take to have one newspaper quote another, no one could predict what might take place in Middle America meanwhile.
 
It was three weeks before Whitman wrote me that the company was going to mark time. This was not unusual in corporate life, where do-nothing is safer than taking a chance. In March 1951, a year after the Turner and Lissner articles, I discussed the matter again with Zemurray. Colonel Jacobo Arbenz had by now become President, succeeding Juan Jose Arevolo, who had survived twenty-eight revolutionary plots. Arbenz, thirty-seven years old, the son of a Swiss pharmacist, was a onetime Defense Minister under Arevolo, an original member of the triumvirate which had taken over the government in the coup that overthrew Jorge Ibico in 1945.
 
At breakfast one morning, I read that the Iranian government had expropriated the British-owned properties of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company. I telephoned Whitman to tell him of the implications of this to the United Fruit Company: if Iran could expropriate properties in the Middle East, Guatemala and other Latin American countries might follow suit in the Western Hemisphere.
 
News today makes its influence felt over national boundaries. Revolutionary action in one place affects another. I told the company that a head-in-the-sand policy was unrealistic. I suggested methods to call attention to the dangers: that a high official of a democratic Latin American nation make a public pronouncement against expropriation, that a distinguished lawyer retained by United Fruit write a brief against expropriation to be turned over to the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate for possible public airing, and that a conference of legal experts on expropriation be called. Such steps, I wrote, would build public support in this country against expropriation and might affect Guatemala.
 
The President of the United States might even issue a credo comparable to the Monroe Doctrine on the dangers to international amity and trade in expropriation.
 
Unexpectedly, the Peron government expropriated La Prensa, the great Argentine newspaper. Worldwide nationalism and expropriation were spreading. Awareness, understanding and an articulate public opinion of our people and government against expropriation might stop the trend.
 
With Zemurray's blessing, I saw Arthur Hays Sulzberger, publisher of the New York Times, in late April 1951. I told him about Guatemala's unrest, Communist attempts at infiltration of the Guatemalan government, and our own fears of expropriation. Will Lissner recommended that Crede H. Calhoun, the Times man in Middle America, go to Guatemala.
 
On May 15 Sulzberger wrote me that coverage of the situation was proceeding. In Guatemala conditions had worsened; 6,000 rail workers had gone on strike for eleven days against the U.F.C.-owned international railroads. A settlement met the strikers' terms.
 
The Miami Herald reported that "Communists currently are flying high in Guatemala." Calhoun's articles, masterpieces of objective reporting, were giving the new Guatemala events high U. S. visibility. By mid-July, undoubtedly stimulated by Calhoun's coverage, Time, Newsweek, U. S. News and World Report, Atlantic Monthly, Vision and other publications covered the turmoil.
 
I kept emphasizing to the company the need for continued exposure about events in Guatemala. I had the feeling that Guatemala might respond to pitiless publicity in this country. I suggested that we invite important newspaper editors and publishers to go to Guatemala and report to the American people what they saw.
 
My proposal was accepted, after two years' delay. In January 1952 well-known journalists I had brought together left for the tropics, guests of the company, for a two-week tour, with Whitman as their traveling host. They were to go where they wanted, talk to whomever they wanted, and report their findings freely. The group included William Bowen, contributing editor of Time; Ludwell Denny, Scripps.Howard foreign editor; Roger Ferger, Cincinnati Enquirer publisher; Gene Gillette, United Press day manager; Theodore F. Mueller, Newsweek publisher, and his Latin American associate editor, Harry B. Murkland; Scott Newhall, San Francisco Chronicle Sunday editor; John D. Pennekamp, Miami Herald associate editor; James G. Stahlman, Nashville Banner publisher; J. David Stern III, New Orleans Item publisher; and William Stringer, Christian Science Monitor. They talked with Presidents of Middle American republics, U. S. Ambassadors, businessmen and journalists, and independently saw what they wanted to investigate.
 
After their return, as I had anticipated, public interest in the Caribbean skyrocketed in this country. Ludwell Denny's stories in Scripps-Howard newspapers told of efforts in Guatemala to "engender hatred of Yankee monopoly capital and imperialism." The Americans, Denny said, had replaced the British as the butt of Guatemalan aggressiveness.
 
John McCormack, then the Representative from Massachusetts, talked in Congress about the dangers Guatemala presented to the country and to the company. On February 28 the Boston Chamber of Commerce telegraphed the Secretary of State registering its alarm. The message referred to speeches by Representative McCormack and Representative Joe Martin.
 
Despite Zemurray's usual wisdom, the company had drifted into the Guatemala situation without awareness. The emphasis had always been on things rather than ideas. I suggested to Zemurray that United Fruit organize a strategic intelligence department to appraise political trends so that corporate life would not so often be surprised. Able timekeepers, overseers, managers, and division heads were not trained to evaluate ideological political and social trends. The company should know as much about the communication of ideas as it did of banana disease. It could then make plans in advance of an emergency, stay in an area or leave it or take any other action indicated.
 
In February 1952, the Revolutionary Workers Party disbanded and its members joined the Communist Party following a visit to Moscow by Victor Manuel Gutierrez, an avowed Marxist, member of Congress and chief of the 50,000.member Labor Federation.
 
One hundred thousand people signed a petition to Arbenz asking for dissolution of the Communist Party.
 
The Arbenz government considered the anti-Communist movement subversive and openly accepted the Reds as allies. Communists were wielding power out of proportion to their numbers. 

In March, in a surprise move, Guatemala offered United Fruit, which had been kept dangling, the labor contract it wanted. United Fruit thought it had won a great victory and accepted it, but Will Lissner, Cassandra-like, told me he thought the move was only a tactical retreat of the Communists. He ascribed Guatemala's acquiescence to the company's strength in the negotiations and to U. S. publicity about Guatemalan affairs, and was convinced that the Communists planned a continuing, strong offensive against the company and would attack again at the propitious time.
 
I urged Redmond and the company to support the anti-Communist democratic forces in Guatemala and to launch an attack on the Communist elements seeking power.
 
The people and the Government of the United States, as a result of all the coverage, knew what was happening in Guatemala. But from outward evidences, Americans appeared more concerned about Communist penetration in China, Bulgaria, Rumania, Hungary, Poland and other satellite countries. The growth of Communist parties in France and Italy worried Americans more than the Communists in nearby Guatemala, a manifestation of our tradition of unconcern with Latin America.
 
Press reports from Middle America specialized in dictatorships and revolutions and helped bring about this attitude. Those realities with which the public was unconcerned were often disregarded by our Government. Subordinate bureaucrats found it safer not to do anything than possibly to rock the ship of the State Department.
 
I decided I would find out more about the Communist approach to international relations. Two recently published books on Communist propaganda, The Operational Code of the Politbureau by Nathan Leites and The Organizational Weapon by Philip Klutznick, both published by the Rand Corporation, gave intricate and analytical data on how the Communists went about their foreign business, covering such topics as the predictability and unpredictability of events as a basis for action, the relation of ends and means, the role of objective facts, class forces, and the factors that determine short-and long-range policy and action. These data seemed to me to provide a key to events in Guatemala.
 
Yet I found disagreement among experts about what was happening. Some correspondents saw everything as a Communist conspiracy; others, like the well.informed Sidney Gruson of the New York Times, thought that while the Communists and their avowed supporters had a strong foothold in Guatemala, the country was not going Communist. Herbert Matthews, of the same newspaper, concurred that the Communists did not control Arbenz and the labor unions, and that the leading men in government were not Communists.
 
I thought the company's actions should be based on accurate information. At a conference with Zemurray, we again discussed Guatemala, and I re-emphasized one approach not yet acted on. I said the company "required the highest type of organized approach to problems involved in activities to develop a better climate of public opinion in Middle America, and in the United States."
 
Zemurray saw the need for the proposed activity. He felt my plan would not prevent difficulties but might modify them. He would look for an individual to head up what he called the company's "state department," and he enthusiastically approved an impartial journalistic study to find the truth about Guatemala. But, regrettably, we found no one to do the latter.
 
That summer a sweeping land-reform bill was passed by the Guatemalan Congress to break up the large estates. Owners were to be paid off with 25-year government bonds. The new law called for expropriation oflarge landowners' untilled fields-possibly one-third of the arable land in Guatemala. Plantations of the United Fruit Company were exempted because they were under cultivation. Agitation and some violence took place.
 
What surprises me, as I look back on these events, is how relatively unimportant facts were in company decisions. No one knew what was really happening. One rumor involved three former presidents of Latin American countries and a plan by Moscow to make South and Central America as troublesome to the United States as Korea.
 
When the Guatemalan delegate to the United Nations attacked the United Fruit Company, it was then thought that Guatemala was still antagonistic to the company, despite the labor contract.
 
I kept thinking about the impact of world events in Guatemala, and I sent another memorandum to Redmond on January 6, 1953, on how public support might safeguard U. S. overseas trade and investments.
 
Finally, in March 1953, the Guatemalan government expropriated 225,000 of U.F.C.'s 300,000 acres. The company's appeal to the President of Guatemala was rejected. The seizure included 125,000 acres of wood and brush, 87,000 acres leased to others for cattle and crops, and 12,000 acres lent by the company to its workers to grow their own corn and beans. Guatemala did not take the land planted in bananas, African oil palms and other crops, or the dairy pastures, mahogany forests and building sites. This take-over did not immediately end the company's operation but deprived it of reserves, which were needed when Panama disease killed banana trees.
 
In mid-March the government paid $590,000, around $2.50 an acre, for 233,973 acres of land, valued by the company at $11.5 million. The payment was made in 25-year, 3 per cent government bonds deposited to the company's account in the national treasury. The company, calling the action "practically confiscation," planned an appeal to the Guatemalan Supreme Court and challenged the provision of the Agrarian Law which barred court appeals for land-reform decisions. The bonds deposited in the company's account were of doubtful worth, and the company appeal to the Court was doomed in advance. The company clung to its hope for a possible return of the land on the theory that the United States would make a pronouncement as it had after Mexico had appropriated U. S. companies' property in 1938. At that time Secretary of State Cordell Hull had conceded that government had the right to expropriate property but that the compensation had to be adequate, effective and prompt. Guatemala's action was only prompt.
 
The buildings of the United Fruit Company were not expropriated. Squatters moved into camps on abandoned farms. Most had receipts signed by the local agrarian committee, and government officials were afraid to oust them.
 
Additional signs of Guatemala's drift toward the left followed in April. The pressure of its Communist-dominated labor group forced its resignation from ODECA, a voluntary association of Central American states that Guatemala had helped form.
 
On April 9 the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, in a letter to the U.N. Secretary, accused the press of the United States of carrying on a systematic propaganda campaign against Guatemala. The Minister charged that Spruille Braden, former U. S. Ambassador to Argentina, was head of the public relations department of the United Fruit Company. I knew Braden had been engaged by the company as a front lawyer after his retirement from the State Department. I had no relations with him and knew nothing of his so-called public relations activities. I had met him casually, but I was not overly impressed by his perspicacity. Judging by his subsequent conduct and pronouncements, I felt he had an anti-Communist phobia that he channeled into his professional activity.
 
Guatemala's drift to the left continued. Arbenz proclaimed his intention to move against native reactionaries and privileged foreign countries. Communists were elected to Congress on official tickets, and anti-Communists held only five of the 64 Congress seats. Salvadoran and Honduran banana and office workers were being exposed to Communist propaganda and stirred up.
 
Despite the property expropriation, the United Fruit Company, in May 1953, thought the good will of the Guatemalans might still be won. A little item in the New York Times seemed to offer the opportunity. Guatemalan Indians had asked UNICEF for food. It would be a fine gesture for United Fruit to pay the freight for milk for these children. UNICEF accepted our offer, and 68,ooo pounds of milk were sent to Guatemala without charge on a United Fruit Company ship. But Guatemala appeared to show no disposition to change.
 
Tension continued to mount when, in August, Guatemala expropriated an additional 175,000 acres of the company's coast plantation for distribution among the peasants, proposing to pay $557,000 in 25-year bonds for property valued at $3.5 million. These were two-thirds of the company's holdings, with 250,000 acres already expropriated.
 
In relations between nations matters often move more slowly than in interpersonal relations. The relations between Guatemala and the U.S. were coming to a boil, although I had no idea of what kind of stew it would be.
 
At a Federation of Women's Clubs meeting in Washington, John Cabot, Assistant Secretary of State, said that Guatemala could expect no aid from the United States.
 
A Communist deputy replaced the president of the unionized workers of the United Fruit-owned international railways, and a strike was voted against the company.
 
I kept reading newspapers, magazines and other current publications looking for light on these events. In fluid situations, in wars, political and social movements, facts are the raw material on which sound decisions are based. Small news items may have large implications. In the New York Times, The North American Newspaper Alliance, under a Prague headline, said an Institute for the Study of Latin American Relations was being conducted by the Communist Party in Prague. I decided to follow up the story and the NANA told me the Vienna representative of an English newspaper had supplied the item. I made an arrangement with the NANA to engage the man to give a personal report on the Institute; the report filled me in on the mushrooming Soviet propaganda school which indoctrinated Spanish-speaking students-recruited by Communists in Latin America.
 
A Czech who attended its Latin American Institute would, on graduation, be assigned to a mission in Latin America. He contacted other local Communists trained at the Prague Institute. The relationship between the Soviet Union and the Czech faculty was like its relationship with the Czech Intelligence Service, which operated a large spy organization in Western Germany for Russia.
 
I gave this story to Emanuel Freedman, then the New York Times foreign editor and now assistant managing editor, and on October 7, 1953, Harry Schwartz wrote a byline story in the New York Times which described the apparatus at Prague as a "school for Red agents." I was struck by the thought that although I was advising a banana company, I was actually fighting in the cold war.
 
This and other disturbing news from Latin America started Washington correspondents writing think pieces about the Guatemalan situation, pointing out in one instance that our State Department was baffled by what was happening and suggesting, without specific advice on what to do about them, that dire events might occur.
 
The State Department installed John Peurifoy as U.S. Ambassador. At last they recognized that a strong personality was needed in Guatemala.
 
At luncheon I discussed Peurifoy with Roy Howard, head of the United Press and Scripps-Howard newspapers, and with his foreign editor, Ludwell Denny, who knew Peurifoy well. Denny thought we needed a new policy in Guatemala. But we agreed that table-pounding would have little effect on the Guatemalans.
 
Denny was worried lest the U. S. employ sanctions on a unilateral basis. Nationalists in Guatemala and other Latin American countries would use this against us. Denny felt the forces ranged against Communism in Guatemala.economic, political and religious-were apathetic, weak and cowardly, and he felt Peurifoy would not accomplish much.
 
We invited another group of American journalists to visit Middle America to see conditions for themselves. This produced a flood of news of worsening conditions in Guatemala.
 
Guatemala had now become a major concern to the U. S. The State Department was not keen about doing anything drastic, concerned lest action just before the meeting of Latin American states in Caracas might adversely affect joint action on anti-Communism by the Latin American states. 

As early as January, although the conference was not to be held until March, newspaper reports said the U.S. would press for full debate to restrict Communism's growing influence in Latin America and would try to win approval for measures to control Communism by stricter limits on propaganda and visas. A joint measure was to be sought under the 1947 Rio Pact provision, providing for action against "an aggression which is not an armed attack." The press reported that the U. S. was having difficulty in lining up a country to present the case against Guatemala. The Latin American countries did not share U. S. alarm over the strength of world Communism, and they sympathized with Guatemala's harassment of the United Fruit Company-to them a symbol of U. S. imperialism.
 
Two warnings received much publicity, creating apprehension as to future events. Ambassador Peurifoy in Guatemala City stated that public opinion might force our country to take measures to prevent Guatemala from falling into the lap of international Communism and that the U. S. could not permit a Soviet republic to be established between Texas and the Panama Canal.
 
On January 14 Senator Wiley, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, gave a talk. The Communists were endeavoring to take over Guatemala as a beachhead. Wiley used names of Communists in the Guatemalan government to prove the interlocking relationship between Guatemala Communists and Moscow Communists. The American Legion sent out 300,000 reprints of Senator Wiley's speech.
 
Today, a decade later, I believe the facts Wiley reported were correct. Nor have I doubts that the Communists wanted to take over Guatemala as a beachhead on this continent. Yet, in the mid-twentieth century, in a country only hours away by plane, the barriers of communications, of language and of social distance were so great that complete difference of opinion existed as to the interpretation of the facts.
 
When events got sticky, the New York Times and a few other papers sent well.informed and knowledgeable correspondents into the country. Otherwise, stringers sent in the news. They depended for their existence on the local community, had to maintain good standing in the community, and could not give their complete loyalty to the newspaper or press service they worked for on a part-time basis. The lack of hard information in crisis situations is dangerous.
 
How to interpret facts was the great difficulty. On January 19, three knowledgeable newspapermen came to three different conclusions and emphasized my dilemma. Bannell of Reuters, the British news agency, and of the Herald Tribune, believed the Communists were the only ones in the saddle. He felt the situation was an emergency. Another correspondent, Blanco, regarded the Army as the most powerful element in Guatemala and thought the Communists held power only by its grace; the future of Communism was dependent on the next presidential election, which he believed would be controlled by the Army. The knowledgeable representative of Time magazine, Harvey Rosenhouse, as strongly anti-Communist as the other two, had a middle viewpoint. He was not frightened as Bannell was, but he did not feel the Army had complete control.
 
I was not privy to all the activities of the company in Boston. They had many advisers and, I suppose, as in the case of George Washington Hill, they kept them in watertight compartments. Their retention of Braden had surprised me. I was equally surprised when I learned that lawyers Robert La Follette and Thomas Corcoran were on the company payroll.
 
In February a rumor linked the U.S. with four right-wing countries. The talk in this instance was that Nicaragua's president was scheming with Guatemala's anti.Communists to invade Guatemala, and that this "operation el diablo" had the support of the U.F.C., the United States, Salvador, Venezuela and the Dominican Republic. The Guatemalan government published facsimiles of letters. The U. S. State Department called the charges ridiculous and accused the Communists of a ruse to disrupt the forthcoming Tenth Inter-American Conference.
 
At the Caracas Conference of Latin American nations, the United States and Guatemala clashed head-on, but finally took action against Communist infiltration. It made little impact on Guatemala. The Communists continued to enjoy the favor of Arbenz. The country's opposition press was in a state of shock. Ed Whitman told me that a Mexican-Spaniard, Louis Care, was conducting a leftist radio program over the Voice of Guatemala, the national network.
 
On April 20, 1954, the Department of State made a formal claim for almost $16 million as compensation for the 254,000 expropriated acres, which had been filed with the Department by the United Fruit Company in March 1953. According to newspaper stories, a wave of uneasiness was sweeping Guatemala in reaction to the claim.
 
Another incident that month created a stir in our country-in April, the motor vessel Aljhem loaded 2,000 tons of arms at a Communist Polish port; the cargo was falsely manifested as machinery, hardware, chemicals and optical glass. The vessel's orders were changed successively to Curac;ao, Puerto Cortes, Honduras and, finally, Guatemala. The cargo was unloaded at Puerto Barrios under the supervision of the Defense Minister and shipped to the capital by rail. Anti-Communist exiles exploded dynamite under one train. Guatemala justified its arms purchase on grounds that the United States refused to sell arms to it.
 
The United States protested the shipment of arms. President Eisenhower called it disturbing and hinted that the resolution of Caracas on Communist infiltration might be enforced. Michael Lever of the OAS in Washington told me the lawyers he had talked to saw nothing illegal in this shipment; the very openness of it indicated that there was nothing to hide.
 
Arbenz used May Day to discuss the United States claim and other controversial matters between the two countries. He denounced as blackmail the U. S. claim for indemnity to the United Fruit Company. He called for a halt of H-bomb tests and banning of atomic weapons, aligning himself with the current Communist line.
 
In May, Guatemalan Communists crossed the border to Honduras to stir up wildcat strikes against the United Fruit Company.
 
Secretary of State Dulles and Walter Bedell Smith of the State Department were said to be at loggerheads on Latin American policy. Smith leaned toward the Acheson policy of "wait and see," but Dulles appeared determined to stop revolutionary movements.
 
I tried desperately to get at the facts.
 
Guatemala, in a statement to the United Nations and its Security Council, denounced the "vast campaign" of the U.S. to make Guatemala appear as an "instrument of Moscow" and as "a spearhead of the Soviet Union against the United States" and looked on those developments with gravity. It said Guatemala, a peace.loving nation, was no menace to anyone, its people were neither aggressive nor interventionists, and that it would safeguard its sovereignty and integrity against any aggressors.
 
In June the situation was so explosive that New York-headquartered press services and major newspaper maintained constant touch with me to see what news I could furnish them with from Guatemala. Leaflets were showered on Guatemala City calling for support of Castillo Armas, the exiled anti-Communist leader who was planning to return. Emergency shipments of arms were being airlifted to Nicaragua and Honduras from the United States. Arbenz now made conciliatory gestures. His foreign minister discussed matters with Peurifoy; he stated that troubles with the United Fruit Company were keeping the two countries apart, and these could be eased by settling problems with the company. Washington spokesmen denied the United Fruit Company was the issue-the real issue was the infiltration of Communists in the Guatemalan government. The foreign minister of Guatemala offered reassurances-no more munitions shipments and Guatemalan troops would be pulled back from the Honduras border. Dulles forecast collective action against Guatemala. Senator Lyndon Johnson, Senate minority leader, told Texas audiences that economic sanctions against Guatemala might be invoked. In Guatemala business was nearly at a standstill. Non-Communist politicians were jittery.
 
The company now made a deal with Costa Rica giving the government 42 per cent of the company's profits. Similar deals, it was rumored, would be offered to Honduras and Guatemala. Undoubtedly a strategic move, it made no impact in Guatemala. A week later Arbenz announced the capture of documents and secret codes showing a conspiracy against him and threatened a crackdown on his opponents. The Communist Peasants Union leader called on rural militia to fight anti-Communists, and a Communist congressman said that opposition would cause bloodshed.
 
On June 21 twenty American nations agreed to a meeting of the OAS to discuss Guatemala and United States relations and to offer a plan to control arms from all sources. The U. S. challenged ships off Guatemala that might be carrying arms. Rumors predicted revolution or civil war in Guatemala. Arbenz, with the approval of Congress, declared a 30-day emergency which suspended constitutional guarantees. An army under Castillo Armas was said to be forming in Honduras to liberate Guatemala, and the press opposing Arbenz was being censored.
 
On June 27 Colonel Castillo Armas and his army of liberation invaded Guatemala. Insurgent aircraft strafed fuel tanks and airfields and gunfighting took place between 3,000 government men and 2,000 rebels. Arbenz claimed the invasion had been launched by his neighbors and the U.S. Guatemala asked for an emergency session of the United Nations Security Council. The Soviet Union supported Guatemala, while UN Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge warned the Soviets to stay out of this hemisphere. 

Arbenz resigned; Castillo Armas was now in control as president, and on July 5 he appointed a cabinet. Our friend Evelyn Irons, the American correspondent of the London Sunday Times, who had gone to Guatemala to cover the invasion, told us on her return of the strange scenes she had witnessed. She had hired a donkey and gone to Armas' camp. She observed members of the Army of Liberation receiving wads of dollar bills passed out by men who were unmistakably American. The word was that the Central Intelligence Agency of the United States had taken over and arranged for Castillo Armas to "set the country free."
 
Castillo Armas was now facing a difficult situation, economically and politically. Communism had gone underground, and there was continued plotting. Armas steered a middle course, trying to reconstruct the country. Revolutionary Guatemalan exiles in Mexico tried to regroup for a return to Guatemala. Dissension prevailed among his supporters.
 
The U.S. guaranteed $6.5 million aid to Guatemala. The liberal press in the United States and Europe criticized the U. S. for its unwarranted interference in Guatemala. In October, the State Department issued and distributed widely a booklet called "Intervention of International Communism in Guatemala." In the next months matters simmered down, but no one could say with truth that Guatemala was a stabilized democracy.
 
I felt more than ever that we should have a greater flow of news from Latin America to the United States. I talked to the executives of the Inter-American Press Association and discussed the possibilities of their undertaking a survey to be financed by United Fruit to see what might be done to accomplish this. Nothing came of the plan.
 
We were so concerned at the state of affairs six months after Arbenz had fallen that in January 1955 I talked to Emanuel Freedman again. He sent Paul Kennedy, who was covering Middle America for the Times, to report on conditions now that so-called "stability" and "democracy'' had been established.
 
The United Fruit Company seldom had long periods of dullness. The United States Department of Justice filed a civil antitrust suit against the company. Those unfriendly to the Justice Department said the suit was filed to appease those who opposed company actions in Latin America and to show how just the U. S. was. Whatever the reasons, the suit called for the dissolution, divorcement and divestiture of properties of the company; the Justice Department accused the company of monopoly practices, of attempting to control banana supply and banana prices both here and in Central America.
 
It was now as difficult to find out what actually was happening under Armas as it had been under Arbenz. In April Michael Lever reported to me that Armas was well intentioned and honest and that he wanted to eradicate Communism and build Guatemala but he was surrounded by the wrong people. The army wanted to oust him and Armas would blow up in six months unless something happened.
 
Herbert Matthews told me on his return from a trip to Guatemala that he was not as pessimistic as Lever; he thought Armas was doing a good job. He believed the real culprits were wealthy Guatemalans who had sent their capital to other countries and had left Guatemala to stew in economic depression.
 
Armas decided that a visit to the United States might help his cause. He was concerned about the blame given him for deteriorating conditions in his country. The United Fruit Company man in Guatemala tipped us off as to the questions he wanted asked at press conferences; he wanted to blame the economic plight of Guatemala on the Communists and to suggest that an economic expert from the United States go to Guatemala and make an independent investigation which would show the devil was Communism.
 
Armas' prestige had dropped in Guatemala. Widespread publicity about an old friend who had cornered the market in beans and corn had hurt him. Police security methods were too much like those in the previous dictatorship. An old law had been reinstituted that made speaking ill of the President punishable by a prison term.
 
Armas arrived in the United States in November. Foreign heads of government are normally assured a formal welcome, and Armas was no exception. With President Eisenhower sick in Denver, Vice President Nixon and Mrs. Nixon greeted him at the airport and gave him a state dinner. In St. Patrick's Cathedral in New York, Cardinal Spellman held a special mass. Columbia University gave him an honorary degree (we had been in touch with the University about it in September) and so did Fordham.
 
Armas visited Miami, New Orleans and Detroit and returned home with kudos. He was granted $15 million by the United States International Cooperation Administration, principally for road building, which was one of his goals in coming.
 
In January 1956, Armas put through a new constitution and gave back to the Catholic Church the rights it had been denied since the anticlerical laws of the 1870s. Communists were barred; the National University was guaranteed 2 per cent of the national budget, and the exiling of Guatemalans was forbidden.
 
In March, Armas moved to the right and signed a law giving the President power to suspend the new constitutional guarantees in the face of the slightest political bad weather. With the new constitution in effect in March, Armas announced a five-year economic development program, apparently to take the curse off his reactionary activities.
 
By August the country was again disillusioned. Land that had been given to the peasants was returned to the original landlords and the peasants were dispossessed; trade unions were allowed only slight independence and the police practiced the third degree. Corruption was widespread; force was used against protesting students, and some were killed. The hope for a democratic regime was crumbling.
 
In 1957 the situation in Guatemala was still deteriorating. The New York Times sent Paul Kennedy to cover the forthcoming election. We felt Kennedy's articles were so accurate that we redistributed them to influential people.
 
Miguel Y digoras became the new President.

Guatemala figured little in our work during the next few years, but I had learned much from the experience.
 
For years we had publicized the company's Escuela Agricola Pan Americana, an institution in Honduras which taught young Latin American men scientific agriculture. Even though they received free tuition, board, etc., there was an obligation on their part not to work for the company after graduation. This completely altruistic idea was Zemurray's. When we first visited this institution, Doris and I were surprised, after traveling through a wilderness for several hours from Tegucigalpa, to come upon a civilized settlement, an agricultural college campus build in colonial Spanish style.
 
A school man met us, Dr. Wilson Popenoe, and we spent the night in his one.story Spanish dwelling furnished with sixteenth-century Spanish furniture and hangings brought over by the Conquistadors.
 
In 1955, Doris and I spent some weeks with the Whitmans as the company's guests at Veradero beach in Cuba. Batista, the dictator, was in power, but as tourists we noted little evidence of his presence and were charmed by the quiet of our out-of-season visit.
 
Three years later, in 1958, political conditions had drastically changed. In Oriente Province, where the company's extensive sugar plantations and sugar mill were located, Fidel Castro was plotting to overthrow the Batista government.
 
Herbert Matthews had courageously traveled to the Castro stronghold in the Sierra Madre and had interviewed Castro and in the Times brought a firsthand account of the burgeoning revolution to the world.
 
As Castro's power grew, we received reports in New York from company men in Havana that both the Batista government and the Castro forces were levying export taxes on local officials of the company.
 
I discussed these happenings with Matthews, and he suggested I talk to Emanuel Freedman and give him the detailed reports we had just received. Consistent with the Times's practice Freedman had his Havana reporter, Mrs. Hart Phillips, get the same information directly from Mr. Raines, the Havana man of the company. I believed publication next morning would bring the news into the open, and that as a result the State Department, which had been dragging its feet, would act. I thought they would call Ambassador Smith back for consultation and then possibly change Ambassadors. Next morning, Thursday, the New York Times published a front-page story which told the public for the first time the news of double taxation and of the threat and intimidation of the United Fruit Company by both parties. Ambassador Smith was brought back for conversations in Washington, and a new Ambassador was sent to Havana.
 
On December 9 the New York Times published an editorial recommending that the OAS act in the Cuban situation-but nothing happened. Our office again became active as a center for giving out news to the press, furnished us by our Havana people. In tum we oriented the company on developments as they came to us from the press.
 
Then Castro marched into Havana and took over. He expropriated the lands and properties of the United Fruit Company, among others.
 
Kenneth Redmond retired, and a new man, Thomas Sunderland, vice-president and general counsel of the Standard Oil Company of Indiana, became president of the company.
 
I, too, became a casualty of this revolution. Whitman, the company public relations director, sent me a note telling me I was so well off economically that I didn't need the United Fruit Company as a client. Our engagement of some two decades ended. The new president had issued an across-the-board order declaring that all advisers of the company were to go. Castro's expropriation of the company acreage and a resulting decline in profits and dividends were presumably the reasons for this drastic pulling in.
 
I did not hear from the company officially again. Zemurray, in retirement in Louisiana, has died since. Pollan has too. Partridge retired. Someone with little knowledge of public relations was placed above Whitman, and he resigned after life-long loyalty to the company, today beset by many domestic and international problems.

<a href="https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00TQEM19E?ref=KC_GS_GB_US" target="_blank">Biography of an Idea: The Founding Principles of Public Relations - Edward Bernays</a> 
